# Exploring the Potential Impact of SB9 and SB10 on Affordable Housing in the City of Los Angeles

## Introduction to the Research Question
Today, there is a tremendous mismatch between the available housing stock in the United States and the housing options that people need. The auto-centric single family housing development model is failing to serve the housing needs of residents in urban areas. In recent years, California legislation is beginning to take steps in the right direction by passing ordinances that allow the missing middle housing to exist on parcels that have been zoned specifically for single structures for decades. In 2017, SB 1069 and AB 2299 authorized cities to build Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) in single-family residential zones. Further, the bill also replaced any city’s existing ADU building, parking and use standards and imposed ADU standards on cities that did not have existing ones.

More recently, in September 2021, SB 9 and SB 10 were signed into law by Governor Gavin Newsom. SB 9 allows owners to build ADUs or duplexes on lots currently zoned as single-family housing. It also offers the option to split the lots into two parcels. Essentially, it would allow the construction of up to 4 housing units plus 2 ADUs on what is currently zoned for 1 unit. SB 10 allows, but does not require, cities to zone a parcel for up to 10 residential units if it’s located in a “transit-rich area”. California defines these areas as any parcel located on a fixed-route bus line that meets service interval requirements, or within a half mile of a major transit stop. Upzoning under this bill would allow local jurisdictions to bypass the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), allowing development to begin more quickly.

Our research question is: ***How can recent California legislation be implemented to create more housing stock and homeownership opportunities for low and moderate income residents of Los Angeles County?***

## Why is this Important?

In the past decade the already critical housing crisis in Los Angeles County has reached an all time high which has only been exacerbated by the COVID epidemic. Real estate prices have skyrocketed while incomes have decreased, and thus, housing in the county has become even less affordable leading to displacement and gentrification. Simultaneously, the county is also seeing unprecedented numbers of homeless encampments. To help ease this crisis, most legislative efforts have focused on multifamily affordable housing development. Although these efforts have been beneficial, multifamily affordable housing development usually takes about 2 years, if not more. With the state of the current housing crisis, individuals do not have two years to wait. However, the construction of ADUs only takes a few months. Affordable housing through the development of ADUs offers cities a quicker alternative to produce needed affordable housing within their jurisdictions so that citizens will not need to wait two years for new affordable housing to hit the market. Additionally, upzoning more single family lots to buid affordable housing will help expand our housing supply quicker. Our research will help identify the feasibility of Governor Newson’s new bills in the development of affordable housing through ADU production and upzoning within LA. Do these new bills have the power to streamline enough affordable housing units to help make a dent in recent RHNA numbers? Will the jurisdictions that need affordable housing the most benefit from these bills? 

## Spatial Scope
The scope of our research project will encompass the City of Los Angeles The spatial scope of this project matters because Los Angeles’ already critical housing crisis has reached a frightening peak. These new California legislations however, can provide a unique opportunity for the county to regain control of the ongoing housing crisis. It’s important to note that different geographic locations require different solutions to the housing crisis. Though these legislations are a step in the right direction, cities may need to fine tune their zoning codes further to make full use of these new laws. Los Angeles is a big enough geographic location to see the varying housing needs. 

## Data Sources

1. *Zoning:* Our first primary data source will highlight existing zoning in the City of Log Angeles. This data source will help us identify the single family zoned parcels in LA. The zoning information for the City of Los Angeles can be found [here](https://geohub.lacity.org/datasets/zoning/explore?location=34.055956%2C-118.234564%2C12.90). 

2. *Gross Rent as a Percentage of Household Income:* Our second primary data source will highlight gross rent as a percentage of household income data in the City of Los Angeles broken down into census tracts. This data source will provide us with information about areas in Los Angeles that may need more access to affordable housing than others. Spatial data can be found [here](https://censusreporter.org/data/table/?table=B25070&geo_ids=140|16000US0644000). 

3. *ADU and Smallplex Locations:* Our third primary data source will include all permit databases from cities across Los Angeles County. These databases will provide us with information about permit applications for ADUs and smallplexes. The permit database can be found [here](https://data.lacity.org/City-Infrastructure-Service-Requests/Building-and-Safety-Permit-Information-Old/yv23-pmwf/data). 


## Methodology

To research the feasibility of these new bills we want to identify and visualize the location and number of new affordable housing that could theoretically be built within LA. To do this, we will use the following methodology:

 1. *Identify Single Family Zoning Lots:* We will compile the geospatial zoning data across the City of Los Angeles. Once we have the zoning data, we will highlight the single family lots that could theoretically utilize these bills to streamline ADU development and/or upzone zoning. This can be visualized through maps and charts. 
2. *Identifying the Locations of Smallplexes:” As previously mentioned, SB9 and SB10 allows for upzoning and the development of smallplexes on single family zoned lots. Since we are analyzing the location of potential smallplexes in Los Angeles City, we would also like to take a look at the current locations of smallplexes throughout the city. This will help us understand if our bills could potentially expand and disperse the locations of smallplexes throughout the city. 
3. *Cross Check ADU Permit Data:* Once we identify the location of lots that these new bills can apply to and areas of need, we must make sure that these lots do not already have an ADU on them. If they have an ADU and have reached their max number of additional dwellings, these bills will no longer apply. Thus, we will use our ADU permit data to cross reference our applicable lots and disqualify lots with overlaps. 
4. *Identify Jurisdictions in Need of Affordable Housing:* Next we will identify the jurisdictions that are most in need of affordable housing. One data source we can use to identify need is gross rent as a percentage of household income of census tracts within the city. The golden rule for affordable housing is that affordable housing should be less than 30% of your income. Analyzing this data will allow us to pinpoint the census tracks that are most in need of affordable housing. We can then overlay this data with our single family parcel information to see if SB9 and SB10 could be utilized in areas with the highest need. We can also visualize this data through maps and charts. 

Once we have located the true potential locations in which these bills could be used to build new affordable housing, we will analyze our findings. This analysis can include, but is not limited to:
1. Mapping locations to visualize our data 
2. Tallying the number of potential ADUs and smallplexes within each jurisdiction to analyze if these units can sufficiently increase the number of affordable housing units 
3. Cross referencing potential ADU and smallplex locations with identified areas of need to see if they would help ease the housing crisis in neighborhoods that need affordable housing the most. 
4. Cross referencing potential ADU and smallplex locations with the jurisdictions that are currently seeing the most affordable housing development to see if total development would be concentrated in any particular jurisdiction or if these units could potentially help disperse development across the county. 


## Conclusion 

In our research, we hope to gain insight into if SB8, SB9, and SB10 could potentially make a tangible impact on the supply of affordable housing within Los Angeles. Many jurisdictions with the highest real estate prices are also the jurisdictions with the most single family zoned lots and the least affordable housing available. Thus, we hope to find that these bills can actually help produce a new form of affordable housing in the jurisdictions that need the most affordable housing development. It is also no secret that many NIMBY neighborhoods have blocked the development of affordable multifamily housing within their jurisdiction. We hope to see a good distribution of potential affordable housing in these neighborhoods. 

