# Introduction to the Research Question
Today, there is a tremendous mismatch between the available housing stock in the United States and the housing options that people need. The auto-centric single family housing development model is failing to serve the housing needs of residents in urban areas. In recent years, California legislation is beginning to take steps in the right direction by passing ordinances that allow the missing middle housing to exist on parcels that have been zoned specifically for single structures for decades. In 2017, SB 1069 and AB 2299 authorized cities to build Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) in single-family residential zones. Further, the bill also replaced any city’s existing ADU building, parking and use standards and imposed ADU standards on cities that did not have existing ones.

More recently, in September 2021, SB 9 and SB 10 were signed into law by Governor Gavin Newsom. SB 9 allows owners to build duplexes on lots currently zoned as single-family housing. It also offers the option to split the lots into two parcels. Essentially, it would allow the construction of up to 4 housing units on what is currently zoned for 1 unit. SB 10 allows, but does not require, cities to zone a parcel for up to 10 residential units if it’s located in a “transit-rich area”. California defines these areas as any parcel located on a fixed-route bus line that meets service interval requirements, or within a half mile of a major transit stop. Unzoning under this bill would allow local jurisdictions to bypass the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), allowing development to begin more quickly.

Our research question is: ***How can recent California legislation be implemented to create more housing stock and homeownership opportunities for low and moderate income residents of Los Angeles County?***

# Why is this Important?

In the past decade the already critical housing crisis in Los Angeles County has reached an all time high which has only been exacerbated by the COVID epidemic. Real estate prices have skyrocketed while incomes have decreased, and thus, housing in the county has become even less affordable leading to displacement and gentrification. Simultaneously, the county is also seeing unprecedented numbers of homeless encampments. To help ease this crisis, most legislative efforts have focused on multifamily affordable housing development. Although these efforts have been beneficial, multifamily affordable housing development usually takes about 2 years, if not more. With the state of the current housing crisis, individuals do not have two years to wait. However, the construction of ADUs only takes a few months. Affordable housing through the development of ADUs offers cities a quicker alternative to produce needed affordable housing within their jurisdictions so that citizens will not need to wait two years for new affordable housing to hit the market. Our research will help identify the feasibility of Governor Newson’s new bills in the development of affordable housing through ADU production within LA County. Do these new bills have the power to streamline enough affordable housing units to help make a dent in recent RHNA numbers? Will the jurisdictions that need affordable housing the most benefit from these bills? 

# Spatial Scope
The scope of our research project will encompass all of Los Angeles County. The spatial scope of this project matters because Los Angeles County’s already critical housing crisis has reached a frightening peak. These new California legislations however, can provide a unique opportunity for the county to regain control of the ongoing housing crisis. It’s important to note that different geographic locations require different solutions to the housing crisis. Though these legislations are a step in the right direction, cities may need to fine tune their zoning codes further to make full use of these new laws. Los Angeles County is a big enough geographic location to see the varying housing needs. 

# Data Sources

**(1)** *Zoning:* Our first primary data source will highlight existing zoning conditions in Los Angeles County. This data source will highlight areas in which ADUs and smallplexes are permitted to be constructed. The zoning information for the City of Los Angeles can be found [here](https://geohub.lacity.org/datasets/zoning/explore?location=34.055956%2C-118.234564%2C12.90). The repo link can be found [here](https://github.com/trongk/206a-groupproject/blob/f6f006640de35eaee1a7a16d44059027a0cfc764/groupassignments/LA%20City%20Zoning.csv). The zoning information for the County of Los Angeles can be found [here](https://geohub.lacity.org/maps/labos::land-use-and-zoning/about). As we move forward, we will continue to find and add zoning information from other cities in Los Angeles County.

**(2)** Our second primary data source will highlight median income data in Los Angeles County broken down into census tracts. This data source will provide us with information about areas in Los Angeles County that may need more access to affordable housing than others. Spatial data on median income can be found [here](
https://censusreporter.org/data/map/?table=B19013&geo_ids=05000US06037,140|05000US06037&primary_geo_id=05000US06037). The repo link can be found [here](https://github.com/trongk/206a-groupproject/blob/58c0393bffd09acce48b9d3baf2134e280a193cc/groupassignments/LA%20County%20Median%20Income.zip). 

**(3)** Our third primary data source will include all permit databases from cities across Los Angeles County. These databases will provide us with information about permit applications for ADUs and smallplexes. The permit database for the City of Los Angeles can be found [here](https://data.lacity.org/City-Infrastructure-Service-Requests/Building-and-Safety-Permit-Information-Old/yv23-pmwf/data). The dataset for permits in the City of Los Angeles is too large, and can't be uploaded to Github; it currently exists on our local computer. As we move forward, we will continue adding permit databases from other cities in Los Angeles County. 


# Methodology

# Conclusion 
